Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Sybilla Gross and  Haidi Lun Subscriber Benefit Subscribe Miner Rio Tinto Group sees a host of near-term economic challenges in China, including in the country’s real estate industry, but reaffirmed its positive medium- and long-term outlook. “It has been bumpy but I think we need to remember that they have, in effect, come out of Covid a year after us,” Chairman Dominic Barton told Bloomberg Television in an interview on Monday. He added: “There are also challenges, as you mentioned. There is a big real estate issue.” Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world Americas+1 212 318 2000 EMEA+44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world Americas+1 212 318 2000 EMEA+44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors Rio Tinto Says China’s Economy Faces a ‘Big Real Estate Issue’ China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight Rio Tinto Says China’s Economy Faces a ‘Big Real Estate Issue’ The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Dominic Barton, Chairman at Rio Tinto, discusses the miner's business strategy in Mongolia. Earlier this year, the company began production at the underground portion of its Oyu Tolgoi operation, which is expected to be the world's fourth-largest copper mine by 2030. He speaks with Haidi Stroud-Watts and Kathleen Hays on "Daybreak Asia". 

 (Source: Bloomberg) Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Maria Elena Vizcaino and  Selcuk Gokoluk Subscriber Benefit Subscribe Investors who stuck with bonds from countries that defaulted or are on the brink are betting the double-digit returns they’ve posted over the past month are just the start of a rally. JPMorgan Asset Management’s Pierre-Yves Bareau, who oversees $50 billion in emerging-market debt, says he’s never seen so much value unlocked from distressed and defaulted government notes this late in a Federal Reserve interest-rate hiking cycle. Similarly, UBS Asset Management’s Shamaila Khan says there are more opportunities now than she has seen in her two decade-long career. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight An attendee at the World AI Conference walks by a General Robot poster in Shanghai on Friday. Karl Maier Subscriber Benefit Subscribe US-China competition shouldn’t be a zero-sum game. That was the message Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen delivered during her visit to Beijing aimed at finding some common ground between the two superpowers on issues ranging from technology and trade to Taiwan’s security.  US President Joe Biden decided to send cluster bombs to Ukraine to support the country’s counteroffensive against Russian invasion forces, overruling concerns about the grave danger they pose to civilians.  Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Mark Burton Subscriber Benefit Subscribe Global gallium prices jumped 27% this week as buyers reacted to China’s move to control exports of the niche metal used in an array of high-tech industries. Beijing’s announcement on Monday has been viewed as a retaliation over recent trade restrictions targeting the country’s semiconductor industry, and comes amid broader efforts by the US and Europe to reduce its dominance in the supply chain for critical raw materials. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight An open pit at the Batu Hijau copper and gold mine in Sumbawa, West Nusa Tenggara province, Indonesia. Filipe Pacheco Subscriber Benefit Subscribe PT Amman Mineral Internasional, the owner of the second-largest gold and copper mine in Indonesia, advanced as much as 3.2% in Jakarta following the country’s largest initial public offering this year.  Shares traded as high as 1,750 rupiah in Jakarta. They were sold at 1,695 rupiah each in an IPO that raised 10.7 trillion rupiah ($710 million). It was the largest new share sale in Asia this year outside mainland China, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Andrea Jaramillo Subscriber Benefit Subscribe A Colombian mining group is urging the South American government to protect workers from ongoing violence against the industry following a deadly July 4 attack on a coal producer. Tuesday’s incident happened at a Minex facility near the eastern Colombian city of Cucuta on the border with Venezuela. An explosive was detonated as 16 workers were passing by, leaving one dead and several injured, according to the Asociacion Colombiana de Mineria, or ACM. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Michael Heath Subscriber Benefit Subscribe Australia is on track to record a sixth year of trade surpluses and its government projects exports of coal will climb for at least the next three years on rising demand from India and Southeast Asia. The nation posted an A$11.8 billion ($7.9 billion) monthly  trade windfall in May, almost A$1 billion above forecasts, as coal and natural gas shipments advanced, official data showed Thursday. To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot. Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not
            blocking them from loading.
            For more information you can review our Terms of
                Service and Cookie Policy. For inquiries related to this message please contact
            our support team and provide the reference ID below. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe is your essential morning viewing to stay ahead. Live from London, we set the agenda for your day, catching you up with overnight markets news from the US and Asia. And we'll tell you what matters for investors in Europe, giving you insight before trading begins. Overnight on Wall Street is morning in Europe. Bloomberg Daybreak Europe, anchored live from London, tracks breaking news in Europe and around the world. Markets never sleep, and neither does Bloomberg News. Monitor your investments 24 hours a day, around the clock from around the globe. Golf's Greatest Holes: Golfing legend Paul McGinley takes television presenter Chris Hollins on a tour of the best golf courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. Egypt’s Inflation Soars to Record as Food Drives Surge Past 35% Kuwait’s $700 Billion Wealth Fund Is Being Eclipsed by Ambitious Neighbors China Slides to Brink of Deflation, Adding Stimulus Urgency RBA’s Ellis to Replace Westpac’s Evans in Economics Overhaul UK Labor Supply Jumps in Boost for BOE Inflation Fight French Firms Don’t See Riots as Long-Lasting Scar Renault Chairman Says China Raw Material Risk Wakes Him at Night Alibaba Mulls Selling Shares to Ant for Buyback as Probe Ends China’s Struggle to Make Advanced Chips Dramatized in New Series Axiata Eyes Unit Stake Sales as Debt Swells After Overseas Push AI Tool Shows Promise For Treating Brain Cancer, Study Finds Musk Lauds China’s AI Prowess While Warning of Tech’s Dangers Nine British Banks Sign Up to New AI Tool for Tackling Scams China Security Official In Line to Lead HK Agency, SCMP Says Vietnam Orders Netflix to Remove Chinese TV Drama Over Disputed Map Move Over Dubai. This Tiny Emirate Wants to Be the Next Haven for Billionaires The Super Rich Are Snapping Up Tokyo’s New Ultra-Luxury Homes Golden Goose Bets In-Store Cobblers Will Appeal to Sneakerheads ‘Insidious 5’ Topples ‘Indiana Jones’ Before ‘Mission: Impossible’ Launches What Beijing Just Doesn't Get About Brussels Austria’s Century Bonds Have Cost Investors Dearly The Most Overlooked Oil Production Boom Is in China How Africa Can Take Charge of Its Drug and Vaccine Supplies How Mobile Money Is Bringing Electricity to the World’s Poorest A Pop-Up Concert Company Gives Bands a Place to Perform, and 70% of the Profit Departing Female Executives Stunt German Bid to Close Gender Gap UNC Boosts Income-Based Aid After Supreme Court’s Affirmative Action Ruling Where a Horse Comes to Pick Up Your Compost Heavy Rains Cause Flooding, Mudslides in Japan San Francisco’s Sluggish Recovery Puts Its Top-Grade Credit Rating at Risk The Untapped Power of E-Bike Rebates Manhattan DA Says 6 Indicted in Adams Campaign-Financing Probe Struggling Bitcoin Miners Wary of Token’s Big ‘Halving’ Event Bitcoin Rally Falters as More Turmoil, Rates Present Headwinds Polygon Names New CEO, Shuffles Top Executives as SEC Expands Oversight Workers drill cores in the South Crofty mine near Redruth, Cornwall, U.K., on June 6 Cornwall in England has a rich mining history. Its revival could play a key role in Britain’s shift to clean energy, but companies want more government support. Alan Crawford Subscriber Benefit Subscribe When work began at the South Crofty tin mine in Cornwall, Queen Elizabeth I was on the throne, the first English settlement in America had only just been established, and the world’s trade with the Far East was controlled by Portugal. It shut in 1998 after more than four centuries of continuous operation, a victim of sinking prices. Now, South Crofty is part of a wave of mining activity across England’s southwestern tip aiming to resuscitate an industry that until recently looked all-but dead.  Tin, copper, tungsten and lithium, along with associated geothermal energy, are the focus of companies trying to capitalize on the surge in demand for the raw materials that are key to the shift to clean energy.  HANOI, July 7 (Reuters) - New electric vehicles from Tesla (TSLA.O) and rivals are being engineered for efficiency in a way that cuts copper content, changes that could limit demand growth for the metal as the next-generation of EVs hits the road, industry analysts say. The strong ramp-up in sales for EVs, led by growth in China, means copper demand will continue to grow for the remainder of the decade, but innovation in EVs has emerged as a limiting factor, according to two recent forecasts. Copper has been seen as a green-energy transition play, in part because of the wiring needed for electric cars. EVs can use as much as 80 kgs (176 pounds) of copper, four times the amount used in a typical combustion engine vehicle. In a report this week, Goldman Sachs said EVs accounted for two-thirds of the global demand growth in copper last year. But EV and battery makers have found ways to cut weight and costs that also mean less copper is needed per vehicle, Goldman Sachs and consultancy CRU Group said separately. CRU Group lowered its estimate for copper usage in an average EV to 51-56 kgs between this year and 2030. That was down from its previous forecast of 65-66 kgs over the same period. Goldman Sachs estimated copper in an average EV would fall to 65 kgs per vehicle by 2030 compared with an estimate of 73 kgs last year. Both cited a chain of engineering changes intended to improve range, reduce weight and bolster efficiency of EVs that will have the cumulative effect of cutting copper content. "It may be the first crack in the story on the demand side," CRU analyst Robert Edwards said. "Some of the projections out there have been very aggressive in terms of potential green energy demand (for copper)." The engineering changes include shifting to more compact batteries where cells do not have to be wired into modules, using thinner copper foil in battery cells and shifting to higher voltage systems that will require less wiring. In one example, Tesla expects that by moving to a 48-volt system for the secondary battery - the smaller battery used to power functions like lighting and wipers - in future EVs, it will be able to cut the need for copper to one quarter of current levels, Elon Musk told investors in May. Goldman Sachs called innovation in batteries and the potential shift to higher voltage systems like Tesla's "the main threat to copper's EV demand leverage." It expects copper demand for EVs to be 1 million metric tons this year and 2.8 million by 2030. Previously, it had projected 3.2 million metric tons of demand from EVs in 2030. However, a higher penetration rate of EVs is making up for the easing copper usage in each unit. CRU said it expected that EVs and plug-in hybrids would account for 42% of vehicles sold globally in 2030, up from a forecast of a third previously. CRU's Edwards said some of those bullish on copper may have underestimated the potential for EV makers to roll out technologies that limit the use of the metal. The benchmark three-month copper price on the London Metal Exchange leapt to a record $10,845 per metric ton in March 2022, partly thanks to the bullish EV demand story, but has fallen by nearly a quarter since. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. Thomson Reuters Mai reports on the nonferrous metals markets in Asia. She writes about daily price movers, trends and forecasts for the copper, aluminium, zinc, nickel, lead and tin markets. 
She distributes a weekly newsletter here: https://bit.ly/2VMBkfp.
Mai previously covered news from Vietnam.
She graduated with an Economics and Business degree (Summa Cum ... July 7 (Reuters) - Canada's main stock index edged higher on Friday as commodity prices climbed and the domestic economy added more jobs than expected in June, in a positive sign for corporate earnings. The Toronto Stock Exchange's S&P/TSX composite index (.GSPTSE) ended up 20.35 points, or 0.1%, at 19,831.04. For the week, the index was down 1.6% as investors worried that central bank rate hikes could slow the global economy. "The Canadian employment numbers were good," said Colin Cieszynski, chief market strategist at SIA Wealth Management. "It's indicative that the economy is doing well. That's good for corporate earnings." Canada's economy added 59,900 jobs in June, far more than expected, a result analysts said probably seals the deal for another Bank of Canada (BoC) interest rate hike next Wednesday. Separate data showed a slowdown in U.S. job growth but also persistently strong wage growth that could ensure the Federal Reserve will resume raising interest rates later this month. The price of oil settled 2.9% higher at $73.86 a barrel as supply concerns and technical buying outweighed fears that further central bank tightening could slow economic growth and reduce demand for oil. Energy rose 2.8%, while the materials group, which includes precious and base metals miners and fertilizer companies, added 1.3% as gold and copper prices climbed. Hudbay Minerals Inc (HBM.TO) shares gained 6.9% after CEO Peter Kukielski told Reuters that the miner will entertain acquisition offers provided the price is right. Bausch Health Companies Inc (BHC.TO) was also a standout. Its shares rose 7.7% after the company entered into a financing facility with global investment firm KKR. Still, six of the TSX's ten major sectors ended lower, including a decline of 1.3% for industrials. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. LIMA, July 7 (Reuters) - Copper miners in Peru, already battling political uncertainty and regular protests, say they have another hurdle to revving up stalled production of the red metal: too much red tape. The South American country, the world's No. 2 copper producer, has seen output plateau in the last five years as political instability, revolving governments and flagging investment has let rival producer Congo almost overtake it. Mining investment is expected to drop by a fifth this year and company executives said that labyrinthine bureaucracy, worse than in other places, was jamming up new projects, a potential threat to copper output in the years ahead. "Getting a mine operational in Peru can take 10-15 years if you don't hit major hurdles, far from the world average of about eight years," Southern Copper (SCCO.N) Chief Financial Officer Raul Jacob told Reuters on the sidelines of a mining event in Lima. He added there were some 230 "administrative processes" with various authorities to start building a mine, compared to around a dozen just 20 years ago. "There are procedures that are repeated, the same information is delivered to different agencies that do not coordinate with each other... So what happens in practice is that all this prevents the project from moving forward." Peru's copper growing pains pose a challenge for the mining-driven economy and to global supply with demand heating up for the metal that is key for the electrification shift. Neighboring No. 1 producer Chile has also seen production slide, dented by political uncertainty around taxes and regulation. The mining director at Peru's ministry of energy and mines, Jorge Soto, told Reuters work was being done to speed up processes with various state entities related to water use, the environment, resource protection and Indigenous communities. "We are working together to see which are the most important or fundamental standards that should be applied, and those that are not necessary which we can cut," he said. "But that doesn't mean it can be done overnight, because it's not easy in a very large state structure." The government, keen to speed up output, announced this year an agreement with the World Bank to review mining red tape to bring processes more in line with places where projects move forward faster, including Chile, Canada and Mexico. Until that happens, mining executives said Peru's $53 billion mining investment pipeline, largely copper, would only move forward slowly, despite government hopes that some $7 billion of that being unlocked in 2023 and 2024. "No one is talking about changing standards, but just moving more quickly," said Víctor Gobitz, president of Peru's largest copper mine Antamina - owned by global mining giants BHP (BHP.AX) and Glencore (GLEN.L) - which has been waiting since last year for approval to extend the useful life of the deposit. Gold miner Newmont Corp (NEM.N) said last month it would delay investment in its $2.5 billion Yanacocha Sulfuros project in Peru for at least two years to optimize its portfolio and increase shareholder returns. Southern Copper, meanwhile, has five projects worth some $8.6 billion on its slate. Among them is Tia Maria, stalled for a decade due to local environmental concerns, and Los Chancas, stalled by illegal mining within its concession. Gobitz, Antamina's president, also cited political issues including deadly protests that roiled the country's Andean south at the start of the year, and the fact that since early 2022 Peru has seen six different mining ministers come and go. "If you have a permanent rotation of officials on key issues like this, everything becomes cumbersome," he said. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. KALUMBILA, Zambia July 7 (Reuters) - Barrick Gold (ABX.TO) is keen to explore for more copper deposits in Zambia and Democratic Republic of Congo as the miner seeks to expand its presence on the African copperbelt, its CEO said on Friday. The world's No. 2 gold miner wants to explore for deposits of the metal in southern parts of Congo, while expanding and extending the life of its Lumwana mine in Zambia, CEO Mark Bristow said. "We are looking at exploration opportunities across the country just as we are looking for exploration opportunities in southern Congo," Bristow said during a briefing at Lumwana mine. Barrick is considering plans to develop Lumwana mine, which currently produces about 267,000 metric tons of copper into a tier one asset as well as to extend the life of the operation to 2060. Zambia, where Barrick has its Lumwana mine, is Africa's second-largest copper producer, after its northern neighbour Congo. Barrick plans to spend more to build Lumwana into a bigger operation, Bristow said, declining to provide figures. The CEO declined to comment on market speculation that his company was interested in First Quantum Minerals (FM.TO) but said Barrick would adopt a cautious approach to doing deals in the sector. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. BEIJING, July 7 (Reuters) - Mongolia has granted two licences for Elon Musk's SpaceX to operate as an internet service provider using low-orbit satellites, the government said on Friday. Millions of internet users in Mongolia will be able to access high-speed connection via Starlink, the satellite communications service operated by SpaceX, the government said in a statement. Starlink has built a fast-growing network of more than 3,500 satellites in low-Earth orbit that can provide connectivity in remote areas. "A network of fibre optic cables already provides wide-reaching access to high-speed internet across Mongolia but this technology will provide greater access to hard-to-reach areas," said Minister for Digital Development and Communications Uchral Nyam-Osor. "Herders, farmers, businesses and miners living and working across our vast country will be able to access and use information from all over the world to improve their lives." Formal cooperation between the Mongolian government and SpaceX was initiated in February during the 2023 Mobile World Congress in Barcelona. Last month, Prime Minister L. Oyun-Erdene held a virtual meeting with Musk, chief executive of Tesla (TSLA.O), in which they discussed possible investment and cooperation in the electric vehicle sector. Resource-rich Mongolia has extensive deposits of rare earth minerals and copper, which are critical materials in the electric vehicle supply chain. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. TORONTO, July 7 (Reuters) - Hudbay Minerals (HBM.TO) will entertain acquisition offers provided price is right, otherwise companies are "wasting" their time, CEO Peter Kukielski told Reuters in an interview in Toronto. TSX-listed Hudbay operates copper mines in Peru, Canada and the United States and is seen by analysts as one of the potential acquisition targets of large miners as they rush to secure copper supply for the transition towards electrification. "We are a friendly company," and the management and board are not against receiving an offer, said Kukielski. He added that if the company receives a preemptive offer it will go to board and the shareholders. "But if they undervalue our company, they are wasting our time". The $22.5 billion offer by Swiss miner and trading firm Glencore GLEN.L to acquire for the coal and copper assets of Canada's Teck Resources (TECKb.TO) and rumours of First Quantum Minerals (FM.TO) shunning a takeover offer from gold miner Barrick Gold (ABX.TO) have put the spotlight on Canadian mining companies in this space. However, Glencore's offer to Teck has spurred up a call to keep Canadian assets in Canada. Kukielski said there is a potential for some of the mid-size copper companies to come together to create one mega copper company. "I would certainly like to put them together," he said. Despite falling copper prices, the metal is seen as an essential commodity in future energy transition. With ageing mines and newer mines taking at least a decade to come into production, the price of the commodity is expected to go up. Analysts from RBC securities earlier this month said that the volatility in copper prices could create M&A opportunities and consolidation among copper miners. In the last year, mining companies such as BHP Group (BHP.AX) Rio Tinto (RIO.AX) have bought copper assets in Australia and Canada to bulk up their production. For Hudbay the aim is to triple its copper production by the end of the decade, which it is planning to achieve through mergers or acquisitions and not by organic growth. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. Thomson Reuters Divya Rajagopal reports on Canada mining sector, where she covers breaking news on critical minerals deals, takeovers and mergers in the mining sector and how miners deal with climate change and ESG imperatives. Divya previously worked as a financial journalist with Economic Times and CNBC TV18 based out of India. She holds a Masters in Global A... JAKARTA/SINGAPORE, July 7 (Reuters) - Amman Mineral Internasional (AMMN.JK) ended 3.5% higher in its stock market debut on Friday after the country's second-largest copper and gold producer raised 10.73 trillion rupiah ($713.43 million) in Indonesia's biggest initial public offering (IPO) this year. Amman Mineral's stock opened at 1,745 rupiah, 2.9% higher than its IPO price of 1,695 rupiah a share, on the Indonesia stock exchange. It dropped as low as 1,700 rupiah, then climbed as high as 1,820 rupiah before settling at 1,755 rupiah. The local benchmark stock index (.JKSE) ended 0.6% lower. The Jakarta-based company's IPO was the biggest since the $1.1 billion listing of tech firm GoTo (GOTO.JK) in April 2022. Amman Mineral, the country's second-biggest copper and gold producer after Freeport Indonesia, plans to use the proceeds to repay debt and fund several projects, including a $980 million copper smelter it aims to complete in May 2024. Amman Minerals CEO Alexander Ramlie said on Friday the company's business prospects were solid because of rising copper demand and the metal's importance in the global transition to renewable energy. Indonesia, Southeast Asia's largest economy, is stepping up the use of renewable energy. The firm debut by Amman Mineral could also bode well for upcoming listings in Indonesia, one of the world's hottest IPO markets this year, amid a government drive to privatise some state-owned enterprises. First-time share sales in Indonesia have raised $2.2 billion as of June, second only to China in the Asia-Pacific region and ahead of traditional powerhouse Hong Kong, according to Refinitiv data. Next in the pipeline this month is a $160 million IPO by Indonesia's largest cinema chain operator Nusantara Sejahtera Raya. Other upcoming IPOs in Indonesia include the upstream arm of state energy company Pertamina, Pertamina Hulu Energi, which could raise at least 20 trillion rupiah. State-owned fertiliser company Pupuk Kalimantan Timur and palm oil producer PalmCo could raise $500 million each. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. Thomson Reuters Based in Jakarta, Fransiska reports on energy and commodity news in Indonesia, a major exporter of various important commodities such as thermal coal, LNG, nickel, copper, palm oil and coffee. She also covers wider economic news and monetary policy.  Thomson Reuters Yantoultra Ngui is a Southeast Asia Deals Correspondent with Reuters in Singapore, covering M&A and capital market deals in a region that is fast emerging as a hot destination for startup investors, unicorns and IPOs. He previously was a reporter at Bloomberg and The Wall Street Journal. Notably, he was part of WSJ's team that covered the financ... July 6 (Reuters) - Goldman Sachs said rising usage of electric vehicles (EV) was a "key pillar of copper's bullish story", forecasting copper demand from the sector to amount to 1 million tonnes (mt) this year, rising to 1.5 mt in 2025. "Due to copper’s highly conductive and ductile nature, it is an ideal candidate for transformation and transmission of electrical energy in EVs," the bank said in a note dated Wednesday. Last year, EV production accounted for about two-thirds of the increase in global copper demand, with EVs likely accounting for about 27% of additional copper consumption over the next decade, the bank said. Goldman said its analysts were optimistic about EVs, anticipating "strong sales in China, driven by lower prices and a high demand for EVs that has been building up over the rest of 2023." Benchmark copper prices on the London Metal Exchange (LME) lost 7.5% in the second quarter of 2023 due to a slow recovery in demand in China and concerns over global economic growth. However, copper usage in EVs could fall in the longer term, with the amount of copper used per EV likely falling to 65 kg per unit by 2030, compared with 73 kg in 2022, the bank said. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. July 6 (Reuters) - When archaeologists discovered a megalithic tomb in Spain dating back nearly 5,000 years and bearing sumptuous items such as a dagger made of rock crystal, ostrich eggshell and an African elephant's tusk, they knew the person buried inside was a powerful figure. What they did not realize was that this was a woman. Researchers said on Thursday an analysis of tooth enamel showed that the body entombed at the site near Seville was not a man as previously thought, a finding that indicates the leadership role women played in this ancient society that predated the pyramids of Egypt - and perhaps elsewhere. She has been dubbed the "Ivory Lady" because of the finely crafted ivory grave objects surrounding her and the fact that a full elephant tusk was laid above her head during burial, as if protecting her, in a tomb dating to between 2800 and 2900 BC. The tomb, excavated in 2008, was more impressive than any other known from the Iberian peninsula from the time. "She stands out as the most prominent person ever to have lived in that period" in this region, said University of Seville professor of prehistory Leonardo García Sanjuán, one of the authors of the research published in the journal Nature. While the researchers do not know precisely who she was or what societal role she played, they suspect she combined political and religious power and may have been viewed as the founder of an important clan. No male of similarly high status has been found at the site. Located nearby was a similarly lavish tomb containing the bodies of at least 15 women - thought to have been built by people claiming descent from the "Ivory Lady." "The third millennium BC is a time of major transformation. In Mesopotamia and Egypt, the early centuries of the third millennium correspond to early dynastic polities. In the British Isles, it is the peak time of Stonehenge, a major megalithic monument and sanctuary," García Sanjuán said. "In Iberia, it is a time of increased social complexity, with intensification of production, more availability of surplus, growing inter-regional connectivity and increased social inequality and political hierarchy. The 'Ivory Lady' reflects all these elements," García Sanjuán said. This time period on the Iberian peninsula featured complex societies but predated the formation of political entities like states. "This study throws new light on a problem we know preciously little about: the social and political role of women among early complex pre-state societies," García Sanjuán said. The "Ivory Lady" shows that women may have held high leadership positions during the Copper Age, a transitional period between the Stone Age and the more technologically sophisticated Bronze Age. "The political complexity of pre-state societies is usually associated with concepts such as 'big man' or 'chiefdoms,' which explain the emergence of early forms of leadership," said study co-author Miriam Luciañez-Triviño, a researcher in the University of Seville's Department of Prehistory and Archaeology. "In the ethnographic literature, these leaders are most often males. However, our study provides data that may help to revise interpretations of (Iberian) peninsular and European prehistory, showing that we still know little about the role of women in positions of power during this period," she added. The entombed skeleton's fragmentary state made it hard to determine gender. Certain features had led to an earlier conclusion that the person was "likely male." The researchers solved the mystery by analyzing a molar and an incisor - detecting the presence of a gene regulating a certain enamel-forming protein to reveal it was a woman. "One of the keys to progress in prehistoric archaeology is the use of all the new analytical methods available," Luciañez-Triviño said. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles. JOHANNESBURG, July 6 (Reuters) - Kenya's shilling and Zambia's kwacha are forecast to weaken against the dollar in the week to next Thursday, Uganda's currency will strengthen, while those of Ghana and Nigeria will remain stable, traders said. Kenya's shilling is expected to remain on the back foot in the week ahead as persistent demand for dollars from oil importers and manufacturers weighs on the local currency. At 0814 GMT, commercial banks quoted the shilling at 140.75/95 per dollar compared with last Thursday's close of 140.40/60. It hit 140.80/141.00 earlier in the day, a record low. One trader at a commercial bank said the currency was expected to float around 141.00 levels. The east African nation secured a $500 million 3-year and 5-year syndicated medium-term loan facility on Thursday in a much-needed boost as it has struggled to access international capital markets after Eurobond yields surged last year. "The secured facility will be handy in the near term. What needs to be cleared (up) is the opaqueness about our debt situation, and more importantly what steps the government is doing on the tax front," the trader said. Nigeria's naira is seen trading at current levels next week due to a shortage of liquidity as the currency finds its market level after the central bank's liberalisation of the exchange rate market, traders said. The naira hit a weekly low of 788.5 against the dollar on Monday, near a record low level it touched in the previous session and weaker than the black market rate of 785 naira. "The currency is expected to continue to trade at current levels of between 750 and 790 ... until we see improved FX liquidity and the central bank is able to attract other sources of FX inflows from (foreign portfolio investors) and international oil companies," one trader said. Ghana's cedi is expected to hold steady against the dollar next week on the back of high foreign exchange liquidity following central bank support, traders said. Refinitiv Eikon data showed the cedi trading at 11.0000 to the dollar on Thursday, compared with 11.1500 at last Thursday's close. "The pair has traded sideways in recent sessions due to ample FX liquidity. We expect this narrative to persist in the near term, with the cedi continuing to hold its own against the greenback. Bid-offer spreads are also expected to tighten further," said Sedem Dornoo, a senior trader at Absa Bank Ghana. Chris Nettey, Head of Trading Stanbic Bank Ghana, said the cedi had appreciated marginally due to increased supply on the interbank market. The Ugandan shilling is expected to firm in the coming week, drawing support from hard currency inflows from exporters of commodities such as coffee. At 0850 GMT, commercial banks quoted the shilling at 3,690/3,700, compared with last Thursday's close of 3,660/3,670. "Inflows from commodity exporters are quite strong, yet from the demand side, activity is very low. I would reckon this dynamic should favour the shilling in the short term," said an independent foreign exchange trader in the capital Kampala. Zambia's kwacha is likely to remain under pressure against the dollar next week as demand for hard currency in the market outstrips supply. On Thursday, commercial banks quoted the currency of Africa's second-largest copper producer at 18.0400 per dollar, compared to 17.4500 at the close of business a week ago. Market players with dollar positions were holding on to hard currency in anticipation of higher rates, Access Bank said in a note on Thursday. "The kwacha is anticipated to follow a downward trend in the near term given current market trends persist," Access Bank said. Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.  Eleven people were apprehended by the Chilean police after being caught stealing four bags of copper concentrate from BHP’s Escondida copper mine in northern Chile, the world’s largest. The thieves, however, were planning to steal way more metal as they were carrying with them 325 empty bags, in addition to tools such as chisels, shovels and sieves. The group was discovered when a police unit was passing through Antofagasta’s route B475 on Saturday and detected unusual activities at the mine. When interrogated about their presence at the operation, the men failed to explain themselves. Police, then, contacted Escondida’s management who confirmed that the intruders were not employed by BHP. The men were brought to Antofagasta’s prosecutor’s office, who then passed on the case to the relevant criminal court. They were accused of robbery in an inhabited location, detained for a few hours and then released. According to police, five of the people involved in the incident were Chileans with a long history of criminal offences; another five were undocumented Venezuelans and one of them was an undocumented Colombian.  An archaeological expedition from the University of Gothenburg discovered the tombs of the rulers of the Bronze Age trading metropolis Hala Sultan Tekke in Cyprus. The city was a center for the copper trade in the period 1500–1300 BCE and the tombs recently unearthed rank among the richest ever found in the Mediterranean region. “Considering the richness of the grave goods, it is a reasonable assumption that these were royal tombs, even though we do not know much about the form of government practiced in the city at the time,” Peter Fischer, leader of the expedition, said in a media statement. “Undoubtedly those buried here were part of the city’s government.” The tombs, located outside the 50-hectare Bronze Age city, consist of underground chambers accessed via a narrow passage from the surface. The chambers varied in size, measuring up to 4 x 5 meters. The Swedish Söderberg expedition, which has been excavating in Hala Sultan Tekke near the city of Larnaca on the south coast of Cyprus since 2010, has previously found chamber tombs with valuable grave goods. What distinguishes the newly discovered ones from those excavated before is the sheer quantity of artifacts and their superb quality. “We found more than 500 complete artifacts distributed among two tombs. Many of the artifacts consist of precious metals, gems, ivory and high-quality ceramics,” Fischer said. About half of the artifacts were imported from neighbouring cultures. Gold and ivory came from Egypt. Precious stones, such as blue lapis lazuli, dark red carnelian and blue-green turquoise, were imported from Afghanistan, India and Sinai respectively. The tombs also contain amber objects from the Baltic region. To get to the tombs, Fischer and his team used magnetometers, a type of instrument that can produce images showing objects and structures up to two metres beneath the surface. “We compared the site where broken pottery had been plowed during farming with the magnetometer map, which showed large cavities one to two meters below the surface. This led us to continue investigating the area and to discover the tombs,” the researcher said. The well-preserved skeletons in the tombs include that of a woman surrounded by dozens of ceramic vessels, jewelry and a round bronze mirror that was once polished. A one-year-old child with a ceramic toy lay beside her. “Several individuals, both men and women, wore diadems, and some had necklaces with pendants of the highest quality probably made in Egypt during the 18th dynasty, at the time of such pharaohs as Thutmose III and Amenophis IV (Akhenaten) and his wife Nefertiti,” Fischer noted. Embossed images of bulls, gazelles, lions and flowers adorn the diadems. Most of the ceramic vessels came from what we now call Greece, and the expedition also found pots from Türkiye, Syria, Palestine and Egypt. The grave goods also included bronze weapons, some inlaid with ivory, and a gold-framed seal made of hematite with inscriptions of gods and rulers. “The vast wealth of the entombed individuals came from the production of copper. Nearby mines in the Troodos Mountains produced copper ore, which was refined in the city. This port city then exported the refined metal in large quantities to neighbouring cultures. Copper was an important commodity because, combined with tin, it becomes the hard alloy bronze, which gave its name to the Bronze Age,” Fischer said.  New electric vehicles from Tesla and rivals are being engineered for efficiency in a way that cuts copper content, changes that could limit demand growth for the metal as the next-generation of EVs hits the road, industry analysts say. The strong ramp-up in sales for EVs, led by growth in China, means copper demand will continue to grow for the remainder of the decade, but innovation in EVs has emerged as a limiting factor, according to two recent forecasts. Copper has been seen as a green-energy transition play, in part because of the wiring needed for electric cars. EVs can use as much as 80 kgs (176 pounds) of copper, four times the amount used in a typical combustion engine vehicle. In a report this week, Goldman Sachs said EVs accounted for two-thirds of the global demand growth in copper last year. But EV and battery makers have found ways to cut weight and costs that also mean less copper is needed per vehicle, Goldman Sachs and consultancy CRU Group said separately. CRU Group lowered its estimate for copper usage in an average EV to 51-56 kgs between this year and 2030. That was down from its previous forecast of 65-66 kgs over the same period. Goldman Sachs estimated copper in an average EV would fall to 65 kgs per vehicle by 2030 compared with an estimate of 73 kgs last year. Both cited a chain of engineering changes intended to improve range, reduce weight and bolster efficiency of EVs that will have the cumulative effect of cutting copper content. “It may be the first crack in the story on the demand side,” CRU analyst Robert Edwards said. “Some of the projections out there have been very aggressive in terms of potential green energy demand (for copper).” The engineering changes include shifting to more compact batteries where cells do not have to be wired into modules, using thinner copper foil in battery cells and shifting to higher voltage systems that will require less wiring. In one example, Tesla expects that by moving to a 48-volt system for the secondary battery – the smaller battery used to power functions like lighting and wipers – in future EVs, it will be able to cut the need for copper to one quarter of current levels, Elon Musk told investors in May. Goldman Sachs called innovation in batteries and the potential shift to higher voltage systems like Tesla’s “the main threat to copper’s EV demand leverage.” It expects copper demand for EVs to be 1 million metric tons this year and 2.8 million by 2030. Previously, it had projected 3.2 million metric tons of demand from EVs in 2030. However, a higher penetration rate of EVs is making up for the easing copper usage in each unit. CRU said it expected that EVs and plug-in hybrids would account for 42% of vehicles sold globally in 2030, up from a forecast of a third previously. CRU’s Edwards said some of those bullish on copper may have underestimated the potential for EV makers to roll out technologies that limit the use of the metal. The benchmark three-month copper price on the London Metal Exchange leapt to a record $10,845 per metric ton in March 2022, partly thanks to the bullish EV demand story, but has fallen by nearly a quarter since. (By Mai Nguyen and Kevin Krolicki; Editing by Emelia Sithole-Matarise)  Barrick Gold is keen to explore for more copper deposits in Zambia and Democratic Republic of Congo as the miner seeks to expand its presence on the African copper belt, its CEO said on Friday. The world’s No. 2 gold miner wants to explore for deposits of the metal in southern parts of Congo, while expanding and extending the life of its Lumwana mine in Zambia, CEO Mark Bristow said. “We are looking at exploration opportunities across the country just as we are looking for exploration opportunities in southern Congo,” Bristow said during a briefing at Lumwana mine. Barrick is considering plans to develop Lumwana mine, which currently produces about 267,000 metric tons of copper into a tier one asset as well as to extend the life of the operation to 2060. Zambia, where Barrick has its Lumwana mine, is Africa’s second-largest copper producer, after its northern neighbour Congo. Barrick plans to spend more to build Lumwana into a bigger operation, Bristow said, declining to provide figures. The CEO declined to comment on market speculation that his company was interested in First Quantum Minerals but said Barrick would adopt a cautious approach to doing deals in the sector. (By Chris Mfula and Felix Njini; Editing by Louise Heavens)  Chile’s total copper production fell14% year on year in May to 408,200 metric tons, government body Cochilco said on Wednesday. Production from state-owned giant Codelco fell 22.4% on a year-on-year basis to 110,900 metric tons, while production at Collahuasi, a joint venture of Anglo American and Glencore, dropped 11.8% to 43,200 metric tons. Copper output from Escondida, which is controlled by Anglo Australian mining giant BHP, fell 21.5% to 83,900 metric tons, Cochilco said. (By Fabian Cambero and Carolina Pulice; Editing by Isabel Woodford)  Chile’s state-owned Codelco, the world’s largest copper producer, expects total losses of about 7,000 metric tons of copper production due to last month’s heavy rains, its chairman said on Wednesday, slightly dampening forecasts for the year. Speaking to reporters after meeting with the country’s finance ministry, Chairman Maximo Pacheco said the losses included 2,000 tons from the El Teniente mine and 5,000 tons from the Andina mine, which produce a combined 45,000 tons per month. As a result, the company expects total production for 2023 to be in the lower range of the estimated 1.35 million-1.42 million metric tons. “The best prognosis we have is that we’re going to be in the low range” for the 2023 forecast, Pacheco said, adding that more information would come once the balance sheet was finalized. Codelco expects production to start recovering next year, Pacheco added. “From next year we will begin to see Codelco’s copper production recover because new projects are entering into operation, albeit delayed.” The government declared a disaster zone in several regions around the country at the end of June after heavy rains left at least two dead and thousands of homes destroyed. Some operations at Codelco’s star copper mine, El Teniente, were paused and the Andina mine outside of Santiago, the capital, was also briefly halted. Codelco is still struggling with operational issues and a drop in grade ores, which led to its lowest production in nearly a quarter century in 2022. Codelco has also been tasked with leading that government’s effort to take control of the lithium industry. Additionally, the company’s CEO, Andre Sougarret, announced that he was resigning from the company in June, citing “complexities” in running it. (By Fabian Cambero and Isabel Woodford; Editing by Alexander Villegas, Leslie Adler and Matthew Lewis)  Zambia is close to resolving a dispute with Vedanta Resources over its Konkola Copper Mines, with a deal over the future of the partly state-owned unit “imminent”, its mines minister said. KCM has battled to attract investment since relations between Zambia and Vedanta broke down several years ago, culminating in the state’s take-over of the KCM assets and forced liquidation in May 2019. The move triggering protracted legal battles, with Vedanta approaching an arbitration court in London to fight off the seizure of the copper assets. “The negotiations are advanced and an announcement is imminent,” Zambia’s Mines Minister Paul Kabuswe told Reuters. “We need to tie the loose ends first so that we don’t have a recurrence of what happened in the past.” Kabuswe, who has been negotiating alongside finance minister Situmbeko Musokotwane, said the talks would also resolve KCM’s outstanding payments to suppliers and contractors, and technical aspects of the operations. He declined to give further details. Zambian President Hakainde Hichilema wants to attract fresh investment in Africa’s second largest producer copper. A deal could help unlock funding to advance the Konkola Deep Mining Project, which holds one of the world’s richest copper deposits, but requires investment of as much as much as $1.1 billion, KCM said last year. Zambia plans to triple output of the metal key to products from power lines and industrial machinery to electric vehicles over the next decade. A Vedanta spokesperson said talks between the company, which is owned by Indian billionaire Anil Agarwal, and the government have progressed well, and “both parties want to see KCM in production as soon as possible”. “We are concerned with the levels of deterioration of not only the mines but also socio-fabric of the workers,” the spokesperson told Reuters. (By Felix Njini and Chris Mfula; Editing by Jan Harvey)  Global copper smelting activity fell in June, resuming a downtrend seen earlier this year, data from satellite surveillance of metal processing plants showed on Tuesday, despite activity in China rising to its highest level since January 2021. “Outside China, smelting activity weakened from May in all regions except for Asia & Oceania,” commodities broker Marex and the SAVANT satellite service said in a statement. Earth-i, which specialises in observational data, tracks smelters representing 80-90% of global production. It sells data to fund managers, traders and miners. It also publishes a free monthly index of global copper smelter activity. Its global dispersion index fell to 45.9 in June from 46.2 in May, while China smelting activity rose 3 points to 55.7. A measure of 50 points indicates that smelters are operating at the average level of the past 12 months. In nickel, the global dispersion index fell to 40.4 in June from 41.8 in May, the seventh consecutive monthly fall and its lowest level in a year. The China nickel pig iron (NPI) dispersion index fell back to 44.0 from 47.1 in May, recording its fourth consecutive month below the average of 50. (By Pratima Desai; Editing by David Evans)  South Korea’s Lotte Energy Materials Corp. said on Tuesday it aims to become the world’s top producer of high-end copper foil by 2028, as rising demand for reasonably-priced electric vehicles (EVs) will grow the market for the key battery component. Chief executive officer Kim Yeon-seop said demand for copper foil will expand to 2.2 million tonnes by 2030, a fourfold increase from the current 500,000 tonnes.  The company, a unit of South Korean conglomerate Lotte Group, said automakers are increasingly adopting high-end foil to boost the performance of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) batteries, which are cheaper than nickel-cobalt-manganese (NCM) batteries. Lotte Energy, formerly Iljin Materials Co., aims to secure 30% of that market and is targeting 20 trillion won ($15.3 billion) in orders by 2025, its CEO said at a press conference. To achieve such goal, is developing solid-state electrolyte for pilot production by 2024, as well as next-generation silicon anodes and assembly lines for mass production of LFP cathodes. Kim Yeon-seop said Lotte Energy will also work on expanding its facility in Spain, build a new one in the US to benefit from Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), and develop next-generation battery materials such as LFP cathodes and silicon anodes.  Los Andes Copper Ltd., a mining exploration company, is considering options to finance development of a deposit it owns in Chile, including a potential sale of the asset or the company, according to people familiar with the matter. The Vancouver-based firm is working with advisors to study strategic options as it prepares for the next stage of the Vizcachitas project in Chile, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the information is private. Los Andes Copper isn’t currently running a formal sale process, but may start gauging interest from potential buyers, the people said. Los Andes Copper declined to comment. Vizcachitas is expected to become a 180,000-metric-ton-per-year mine, roughly the size of Andina owned by Chile’s state miner Codelco, the world’s largest copper producer. Development costs for a project of that size are likely out of reach for Los Andes Copper, which has a market value of $380 million. The company’s stock has jumped about 30% in 2023. Supplies of copper, the metal used in everything from electric vehicles to wind turbines, are expected to tighten significantly as the transition away from fossil fuels drives a surge in demand. That outlook has led large producers to step up their interest in beefing up reserves both through acquisitions and exploration. Newmont Corp. recently secured a A$28.8 billion ($19.2 billion) deal to buy Australian rival Newcrest Mining Ltd. in a move that will help boost its resources of copper. Los Andes Copper was recently authorized to restart drilling at Vizcachitas after fulfilling conditions laid out by an environmental court. Read More: Friedland warns of a copper ‘train wreck’ as supply stalls Chile accounts for a quarter of the world’s mined copper and has the most reserves. Companies are weighing investment decisions in the nation as regulatory risk subsides. An initial constitutional process that threatened radical changes has given way to a more conservative format, and the government agreed to limit tax hikes. (By Dinesh Nair, James Attwood and Vinicy Chan, with assistance from Thomas Biesheuvel)   A boil-water notice was lifted Thursday in Mississippi’s capital city after nearly seven weeks, Gov. Tate Reeves and Jackson officials said. “We have restored clean water,” Reeves said during a news conference. But a state health department official, Jim Craig, said concerns remain about copper and lead levels in the Jackson water. Craig said people should continue to avoid using city water to prepare baby formula. Emergency repairs are still underway after problems at Jackson’s main water treatment plant caused most customers to lose service for several days in late August and early September. Problems started days after torrential rain fell in central Mississippi, altering the quality of the raw water entering Jackson’s treatment plants. That slowed the treatment process, depleted supplies in water tanks and caused a precipitous drop in pressure. When water pressure drops, there’s a possibility that untreated groundwater can enter the water system through cracked pipes, so customers are told to boil water to kill potentially harmful bacteria. But even before the rainfall, officials said some water pumps had failed and a treatment plant was using backup pumps. Jackson had already been under a boil-water notice for a month because the state health department had found cloudy water that could make people ill.  President Joe Biden arrived in Britain ahead of Tuesday’s vital NATO summit in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius. Some Western allies would like him to back Ukraine’s eventual membership of NATO, but Mr Biden said a vote on the country’s accession would be “premature”. He did, however, tell Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, that he hopes to see Sweden join NATO “as soon as possible”. Turkey has blocked Sweden’s bid to join the alliance. In a phone call with Mr Biden on Sunday, Mr Erdogan said Sweden had not made sufficient progress tackling pro-Kurdish groups. The head of France’s central bank rejected suggestions that the European Central Bank should raise its 2% inflation target. François Villeroy de Galhau, who sits on the ECB’s governing council, said that such a move would only lead to higher, rather than lower, borrowing costs. He was speaking at an economics conference in France, where the finance minister said there should be no “taboos” about discussing the subject. China’s consumer price inflation rate fell to zero in June, down from the 0.2% year-on-year gain in May, adding to concerns about deflation. The price of goods leaving ​​China’s factories fell for a ninth consecutive month in June, down 5.4% from a year earlier, the steepest decline since December 2015. Although China’s economy is still growing, the pace is slowing, with factory output and consumer spending faltering. North Korea claimed American spy planes had violated its airspace and said it may shoot down future incursions. North Korea’s defence ministry also accused America of “undisguised nuclear blackmail”; America is planning to bring a nuclear-armed submarine to the Korean peninsula. Yoon Suk-yeol, South Korea’s president, will ask leaders at the upcoming NATO summit for help in deterring the North’s nuclear ambitions. A court in Zimbabwe upheld a ban on a rally to launch an opposition party’s campaign for the election in August. The gathering, for the Citizens Coalition for Change party, was to take place on Sunday. Emmerson Mnangagwa, Zimbabwe’s thuggish president, beat the CCC’s candidate in 2018 in an election marred by alleged vote-rigging. On Saturday he held a rally attended by thousands. The French government banned the sale, possession and transport of fireworks during the annual festivities to mark Bastille Day on July 14th. Official celebrations will be exempt. Fireworks were often used during the days of violent rioting last month that followed the fatal shooting of a teenager by police in Nanterre, just west of Paris. In Georgia organisers cancelled the main event of Pride Week after thousands of far-right protesters stormed an LGBT gathering, waving the country’s flag as they burned rainbow ones. Those attending were evacuated as rampagers descended on the festival site just outside the capital, Tbilisi, which they proceeded to tear apart. No one was hurt. Figure of the day: 10%, the proportion of Britons who attend rural shows each year. Read the full story. Waiting for a big stimulus package from the Chinese government? Don’t hold your breath. Economic activity is weakening. Industrial firms are receiving fewer overseas orders. The consumer binge that was supposed to follow the country’s reopening to the world has not carried on as long as Beijing expected. But the official response to all this has been muted so far. Policymakers have cut rates and shown some support for the car industry. More infrastructure spending is likely. But all this is not enough to turbocharge the economy.Inflation data released on Monday reflected the slowdown. With Chinese producers sitting on lots of spare capacity, notes HSBC, a bank, goods-price disinflation intensified. After hitting a seven-year low of -4.6% year on year in May, the producer price index, which measures the prices of goods sold by manufacturers, fell to -5.4%, the steepest decline since December 2015. The consumer price index, which tracks prices paid by consumers, fell to zero, the slowest pace since February 2021. Much rides on a meeting on Monday between Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Sweden’s prime minister, Ulf Kristersson, ahead of the opening on Tuesday of a vital NATO summit in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius. NATO’s secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, will make try again to convince Mr Erdogan to let Turkey’s parliament ratify Sweden’s application to join the alliance. Turkey objects because it says Sweden hosts Kurdish and other dissidents it labels terrorists. Pressure has been mounting on Mr Erdogan. He was unmoved by an American offer to sell Turkey warplanes in exchange for giving Sweden the green light. Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, spoke to Mr Ergodan about Sweden on Friday, the same day he was visited in Istanbul by Volodymyr Zelensky. The Ukrainian president was told that Turkey supports NATO expansion in theory—to include Ukraine, for instance. But not Sweden. Mr Stoltenberg, just re-appointed to lead NATO for another year, will need all his powers of persuasion. It will not be hard to set an agenda. On Monday the UN’s Human Rights Council will hold one of its periodic discussions about the plight of the Palestinians. Some of it will surely focus on this month’s Israeli army raid in Jenin, in the occupied West Bank. The incursion, the biggest in the territory in two decades, killed 12 Palestinians (militants, according to Israel), wounded 100 and wrecked homes and infrastructure. One Israeli soldier was also killed.The Palestinian Authority, the limited self-governing body in the West Bank, has lost control of Jenin and other areas. Angry about endless occupation, some young Palestinians are keen to fight both Israel and the PA. This year is on course to be the deadliest since the early 2000s for both Israelis and Palestinians. Ministers in Israel’s hard-right government have pushed for a bigger military operation. The UN’s palavers rarely amount to much—but it’s safe to say there will be more to come. Poor Joe Biden. The English Royal Court is no longer as silly as it was. No longer, as in Tudor times, does a “Groom of the Stool” attend to the king in the toilet. But it is still quite silly. Protocol is complex and transgression easy; Michelle Obama was criticised for putting her arm around the queen. Dwight Eisenhower was such a success, however, that the queen sent him her recipe for drop scones.Mr Biden will meet King Charles at Windsor Castle on Monday. What they will discuss is not clear, but it is also traditional to make much of little. This is the first time that Mr Biden has met Charles since he “snubbed” him by missing the coronation; the absence of an 82-gun salute has been noted. Mr Biden’s Irish Catholic mother hated the English, and advised her son never to bow to the British monarch. Plenty of scope for a catch-up, or a make-up. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has turned attention back to eastern Europe. Eurocrats, multinational lenders and NATO strategists have largely shared a glib view of this region as a single bloc, escaping the yoke of communism for an inexorable journey to join the West’s institutions and follow its political models. But “Goodbye, Eastern Europe” a book published this week by Jacob Mikanowski, an American academic who was partly brought up in Poland, seeks to popularise another narrative. For Mr Mikanowski, the region stands out not for its homogeneity but for wild, glorious diversity. More edgily, he contends that communism was not an alien, Soviet phenomenon but had deep roots. Ukraine itself exemplifies the diversity, with a Russophone east and a post-Habsburg west. And, not for the first time in the region’s history, a common struggle to defy annihilation is forging new social and psychological realities, which neither external nor domestic leaders are likely to be able to control. Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to [email protected]. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.Monday:  Which US sitcom, which aired in the late 1970s and early 1980s, starred Danny DeVito, Judd Hirsch and Andy Kaufman? IN LATE JUNE Robert Friedland, the bombastic boss of Ivanhoe, a Canadian miner, warned that the world was running the risk of a “train wreck”, when a crunch in copper supply would derail the energy transition. The metal is used in everything from wiring to wind turbines—and green mandates in America, Asia and Europe will soon demand many more of these. The price of copper, Mr Friedland suggested, could jump ten-fold in response.  Your browser does not support the <audio> element. Right now, however, the train is not so much derailed as chugging along happily. Having peaked at $10,700 a tonne in March last year, copper prices at the London Metal Exchange have dropped by around 10% since January, to $8,300 a tonne. Spot prices remain on par with or higher than those for delivery in three months, suggesting that investors do not expect them to bounce back soon. What is going on? Because of its range of uses, which include construction, electronics and weaponry, copper prices indicate the health of the global economy, earning the metal the nickname “Dr Copper”. Worries about the economy may therefore be making investors gloomy about copper’s prospects. The post-covid rebound in China, which consumes as much as 55% of global supply, is already fading. Growth is also flagging in the West as rising interest rates bite.  Yet the lack-of-demand story does not fully explain the price fall. Despite the country’s construction slump, China is using 5% more copper this year than last, possibly because the metal—used to form cladding, pipes and roofs—tends to track building completions, which have held up, rather than housing starts. A 7% jump in the making of cooling units in anticipation of a hot summer also supports demand.  If copper markets are decidedly cool, then, it is also because supply has risen. Over the winter a series of disruptions—from protests in Peru to floods in Indonesia—dented global production. Now these problems are easing. As a result, smelters are feeling confident enough to charge miners higher fees, indicating no shortage of raw materials (see chart 1). At the same time, financial investors are snubbing copper. As interest rates rise, they prefer to hold cash-generating assets rather than commodities, which yield nothing. For much of this year “non-commercial” net positioning on copper-futures markets has been in the red, implying that more investors are betting prices will fall than recover (see chart 2). Yet today’s prices remain $2,500 a tonne above production costs at the marginal mine, notes Robert Edwards of CRU, a consultancy. This implies that the recent correction has taken froth out of the market, rather than pushed prices too low, suggesting they could stay subdued for a while. As the energy transition speeds up, it should give a jolt to demand. Sales of electric vehicles (evs), which are already rising, are expected to ramp up significantly in the coming years, and each unit contains three to four times more copper than its petrol-powered peer. Even in a scenario where the transition happens slowly, the International Energy Agency (IEA), an official forecaster, estimates that copper demand from green uses, propelled by the ev boom and undersea cabling for wind farms, will nearly double by 2040.  Supply may struggle to keep up. The average age of the world’s ten biggest mines is 64, which is forcing miners to dig deep for ores of ever lower quality, making each new tonne of refined copper costlier to produce. New mines are scarce. Assuming all certain and probable projects go ahead, McKinsey, a consultancy, forecasts that supply will hit 30m tonnes by 2031, 7m tonnes short of estimated demand.  A severe crunch like that envisioned by Mr Friedland could still be avoided. Most forecasting models, including the IEA’s, expect copper demand outside clean-energy uses to remain stable. Tom Price and Ben Davis of Liberum Capital, an investment bank, reckon this is unlikely, because China’s long building boom has probably ended. Pricey copper will also prompt substitution: some evs already use aluminium wiring. And McKinsey points out that new tech—if it achieves its potential—could close much of the supply gap this decade. There is time to avoid a train wreck. ■ For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter. For more coverage of climate change, sign up for The Climate Issue, our fortnightly subscriber-only newsletter, or visit our climate-change hub. Over the past year we have examined the economic fortunes of Hikelandia. In this group of eight countries—Brazil, Chile, Hungary, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland and South Korea—central banks have fought inflation with unparalleled aggression. Hikelandia started raising interest rates a whole year before America’s Federal Reserve, putting it well ahead of the curve. Since then its average policy rate has risen by more than seven percentage points, compared with around five for the Fed. Yet for months Hikelandia’s central bankers had little joy: inflation kept rising. Your browser does not support the <audio> element. Now, at long last, that is changing. Although Hikelandia’s “core” inflation, a measure that strips out volatile prices such as for food and energy, is still too high, at around 9% year on year, it is on the way down, in part because higher rates are starting to bite (see chart). Hikelandia’s experience offers a glimmer of hope for other inflation-fighting central banks. Wage inflation is moderating across the land. In Chile, for example, pay growth is down a little from the outrageously high 11% year-on-year rate reached in January. This, in turn, is helping cut measures of inflationary pressure. In October South Korea’s inflation rate in the labour-intensive service sector was 4.2% year on year; it has since fallen to 3.3%. Poland’s has slipped from 13.4% in December to 12.3%. Inflation expectations are also dropping, influenced by falling energy and food prices. The average Brazilian expects inflation of 4% over the next year, down from 6% for much of 2022. Kiwis reckon inflation in five years’ time will be around 1%, half their forecast in December. Norway is the only member of Hikelandia that seems to be making no progress. In May core prices unexpectedly rose by 6.7% year on year, a new high. A weaker krone is raising the cost of imports. Strong domestic demand is playing a role, too. In June the central bank surprised markets in an attempt to cool things down, raising the policy rate by 0.5 percentage points. Outside Oslo, the mood music in Hikelandia’s central banks has changed. Officials are still talking tough, of course. South Korea’s rate-setters insist that they will maintain hawkish policy for a “considerable time”. Brazil’s monetary-policy committee worries about “a larger or more persistent de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations”. Yet this hides the fact that Hikelandia’s central banks have largely stopped raising rates. Chile’s bank believes inflationary risks “have been balancing out”. Hungary’s rate-setters expect that “disinflation will continue to accelerate”. Success has come at a cost, though. In 2021 the world economy and Hikelandia grew at the same speed. Now, global growth is 2.5% at an annualised rate, and Hikelandia is stagnating. The unemployment rate has risen by close to a percentage point from a recent low in Chile, and is inching up in Brazil and New Zealand. At least for a while, Hikelandia’s policymakers will probably see a slower economy as a price worth paying. Inflation will have to fall an awfully long way before we start calling these countries “Cutlandia”. ■ For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter. Burning fuel to move humans and goods by road produced about 6bn tonnes of carbon dioxide in 2021, 16% of global energy-related emissions. If countries are to curb the increase in the world’s temperature, they must stop these emissions. That means building battery-powered vehicles which run on electricity rather than internal combustion. And that in turn means mining and processing metals on an unprecedented scale. Your browser does not support the <audio> element. Take nickel, which is used in the part of a battery that stores energy. The International Energy Agency reckons 80m tonnes of it must be mined between now and 2040 if the world is to hit its climate targets. That is more nickel than has ever been mined, and approaches the 100m tonnes of global unmined reserves measured by the United States Geological Survey. It is a truism among resource economists that new demand creates new reserves, as price signals spur exploration and innovation. But that takes time, and the need is urgent. Happily, there exists a vast untapped source of the metal. A stretch of seabed in the Pacific Ocean, called the Clarion-Clipperton Zone (CCZ), some 4,000 metres deep, holds a staggering 340m tonnes of nickel. The trouble is that the rules covering seabed mining, which the International Seabed Authority (ISA), an arm of the un, has been working on for 29 years, have been held back by a weak bureaucracy and the questionable concerns of conservationists. On July 9th a deadline for finalising them is likely to be missed. The isa must publish the rules as soon as possible, so that mining can begin.  Nickel sits on the seabed in potato-sized lumps called nodules, bound up with cobalt, copper and manganese, which are also present in quantities more than sufficient to meet the needs of the green-energy transition. The nodules were created over millions of years as metal particles drifted down and clumped together on the sea floor. They can be vacuumed up using bus-sized robots, then pumped to a ship on the surface.  Conservationists say this process poses grave environmental risks. Carbon will be kicked out of the seabed and make its way into the atmosphere, they argue, generating more warming; life-choking sediment plumes will be created by the collection system and hitherto untouched CCZ ecosystems will be destroyed, disrupting food webs and damaging fisheries. But on closer examination many of these arguments are spurious. When it comes to nickel, mining the CCZ is greener and cleaner than mining on dry land. Research shows that the amount of carbon stored in the ccz is negligible, meaning that mining will not stir up enough of it into the atmosphere to add to warming. Nor, according to research from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, will the sediment churned up spread as far or as thickly as claimed. The most serious concern is the threat to diverse organisms that are unknown to science. But life in the CCZ is scarce—some 270,000 tonnes of biomass would be destroyed by mining—and mostly microbial. And because the CCZ is the oceanic food web’s final stop, there would be few spillovers to other ecosystems. Compare that with the situation in Indonesia, the country that dominates nickel supply and holds a fifth of all reserves. If all those reserves were mined, at least 10m tonnes of living organisms would be destroyed (as in the CCZ, mostly species unknown to science). The associated emissions would also be ten times higher. Several ISA members have called for a “precautionary pause”, claiming that too little is known about the impacts of CCZ mining. This logic is backwards. Too much is known about the vital need for nickel, and the environmental destruction that is wrought by obtaining it on land, for anything other than cautious but expedited action to be a sensible path. Battery technologies that use less nickel—or even none at all—may in time reduce the need for it, but on current trends vast amounts are called for. Member states should therefore seek to finalise the rules as soon as possible, and then to monitor the impact on the CCZ and surrounding ocean as mining takes place. The reward is a cooler planet that hosts a greater abundance of life. ■ China’s communists see themselves as a “vanguard party”, full of dedicated social warriors. Less than 9% of the country’s adult population are members, according to figures released on June 30th. Gaining entry can take years. Even Xi Jinping, the party’s boss, was not admitted until his tenth attempt. Aspiring members are often made to attend ideology classes, take written tests, submit “thought reports”, demonstrate their worthiness through community service and survive an interview by a panel of members. Is it worth the bother? Your browser does not support the <audio> element. The answer might seem obvious. “Virtually every influential position in China is held by a party member,” as Bruce Dickson of George Washington University has noted. Leaks like the Panama papers have revealed the offshore riches accumulated by the families of party leaders. And Chinese social media will occasionally erupt over indiscreet displays of wealth or privilege by members, like the boss of a PetroChina subsidiary, spotted strolling through a Chengdu shopping district in June holding hands with a fashionable younger employee who was not his wife. Yet changes in the party and the economy may be eroding the material benefits of membership. Party members can be found at every rung of the economic ladder. Of the poorest tenth of Chinese households, about 14% contain a party member, according to the China Household Finance Survey by Southwestern University of Finance and Economics. A third of members are farmers and workers (down from two-thirds in 1994). Since becoming head of the party in 2012, Mr Xi has urged cadres to adhere to a less hedonistic lifestyle. “Incorruptibility is a blessing and greed is a curse,” he advised in a recent speech.  In work published in 2019, Plamen Nikolov of Binghamton University and co-authors calculate a 20% wage premium for members over similar workers. One reason, according to other research, may be that card-carrying communists are more likely to get jobs in state-owned enterprises (soes) and official institutions. Figures released in May show urban soes last year paid 89% more than private firms in cities. This gap has grown during Mr Xi’s reign.  But as any well-trained communist knows, true economic clout derives not from labour but capital. So how does party membership affect the assets people own, such as their stocks, bonds and property? Recent research by Matteo Targa of diw Berlin and Li Yang of the Paris School of Economics reaches a surprising conclusion. The two economists look at the urban wealth distribution, as documented by the China Household Finance Survey. In each wealth bracket, some fraction of households include party members. If the fraction were to increase by one percentage point, what would happen to that bracket’s wealth? Messrs Targa and Li calculate that at the lower rungs of the wealth distribution, party membership makes a substantial difference. At the tenth percentile, for example, a one-percentage-point increase in party-membership rates would increase wealth by almost 0.9% (see chart). But the higher up you go, the weaker the financial rewards seemingly offered by membership. For households at the 93rd percentile and beyond, party membership makes no discernible difference at all. One reason for this divergence is property. Among the middle and upper echelons of Chinese society, almost everybody now owns a flat, whether they are a member of the party or not. And so everyone in these wealth brackets has benefited from the long real-estate boom that ended in 2021. Home ownership is, unsurprisingly, patchier among people on the lower rungs of the ladder. For these households, party membership may be a decisive factor governing whether or not they own a flat.  In the five years since the household-finance survey was carried out, home-ownership rates in China have risen further. House prices have also recently fallen in cities, narrowing the gap between the propertied classes and everyone else. Both of these trends probably mean that becoming a communist confers less of a material benefit than it did five years ago, let alone 20 years back. Thanks to these economic forces, Mr Xi may get the more ascetic cadres for which he has been looking. His purges and rectification campaigns have abolished some of the perks of party membership. His mishandling of China’s property market may have helped, too. ■ For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter. Turkey’s economy does not obviously inspire emulation. Over the past five years it has been battered by soaring annual inflation, which hit 86% in October. The central bank is fresh out of foreign reserves, having spent most of them propping up the lira, also to little avail: last month the currency plummeted to an all-time low against the dollar. To make matters worse, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, is about to make good on some expensive promises following an unexpected election victory in May. The bill will probably plunge the government, which had been reasonably fiscally sensible until now, deep into the red.  Your browser does not support the <audio> element. This chaos reflects the upside-down monetary policy pursued by Mr Erdogan. He insists that lowering interest rates is the key to fighting inflation, rather than tightening the screws, which is the solution favoured by generations of orthodox economists. To explain how this could be the case, Turkish officials invoke names ranging from Irving Fisher (an economist, and the finance ministry’s preferred guru) to God (Mr Erdogan’s policymaker of choice).  Since the election Turkey’s monetary policy has become a little more reasonable, as interest rates have been raised. This has not stopped Mr Erdogan’s ideas catching on in the finance ministries of the developing world. “I truly wonder whether classical theories are the way to continue,” muses Ken Ofori-Atta, Ghana’s finance minister, who is one of several African ministers pondering such ideas. “We have to get rates low and growth going,” shrugged another at a recent summit on green finance in Paris. In the past month, officials in Brazil and Pakistan have expressed similar sentiments. Rather than looking at sky-high inflation, a floundering currency or fleeing investors, these ministers focus on Turkey’s gdp growth, which has been remarkably resilient, reaching 5.6% last year. They are sceptical of warnings that such a state of affairs is unsustainable, owing to stalling productivity, which ultimately determines long-run growth, and depleted foreign reserves.  Some reasons for supporting ultra-loose policy when inflation is out of control are much older than Turkey’s experiment. Inflation eats away at the value of official debts, which weigh down developing countries. Letting prices run wild is an appealing option when a government has borrowed too much, even if it is also the surest path to hyperinflation and a currency crash. Other reasons are newer and come from Mr Erdogan. The Turkish president insists that in emerging markets, loose policy helps quell inflation. For countries that want firms to have access to cheap credit, in order to stimulate industrial growth, this is an appealing idea. One argument put forward is that less expensive borrowing will mean lower consumer prices. Another is that it will boost exports, which may replenish foreign reserves. The problem with both arguments is that the economic activity boosted by low rates also buoys wages and makes firms optimistic about future prices, entrenching inflation. Low rates on government bonds also send foreign investors fleeing, whacking the currency.  It is nevertheless true that monetary policy works differently in emerging economies. Foreign investment matters more for market rates; aggregate demand matters less. In a recent paper Gita Gopinath, the imf’s first deputy managing director, and co-authors find that emerging markets’ policy rates have next to no impact on their real economies. Looking at 77 developing countries since 1990, the researchers find that, just as in advanced economies, central banks raise the domestic rate at which they lend to local banks when inflation gets going. Unlike in advanced economies, banks do not pass the rate change on to government and household borrowers.  To understand why, consider how banks borrow. Emerging-market financial institutions struggle to find funds at home, since few households save and there are not many big firms. Instead, they turn to international markets. Counterintuitively, the risk premium demanded by foreign financiers tends to fall when inflation is rising, since at such times economic growth tends to be strong. This balances out the impact of central-bank rate rises. Nor are international markets the only force with which policy must contend. Poor countries are also home to big informal sectors, where firms do not borrow from banks. The un and imf reckon that over 60% of the developing world’s workforce, and more than a third of its gdp, is off the books. Although informal lenders eventually match banks’ interest rates, this takes time. And informal labour markets are flexible, meaning workers’ pay rather than employment adjusts when rates rise. According to the Bank for International Settlements, a club of central banks, this means emerging economies take longer to feel the pinch of higher rates. Informal finance gives people an escape from the banking system. Your columnist was recently in Ghana, where she was told by an informal lender, who takes luxury cars as collateral, that business has boomed since the country’s latest debt restructuring, which wiped out much of the government’s domestic borrowing and almost took the banking industry with it. Unsurprisingly, trust in formal banks is low. The boss of one of the Accra’s biggest banks says other firms are safeguarding against the fallout from another similar episode by stockpiling dollars off the books. The problem comes with assuming Mr Erdogan’s policies will help. If high rates are diluted by foreign lenders and informal borrowers, so are low ones. Ms Gopinath’s research is reason to doubt ultra-doveish monetary policy can produce growth, but it does not support the idea that it can cut inflation, either, contra Mr Erdogan. If she is correct, officials need to focus on cutting the risk premium on foreign borrowing to strengthen the impact of monetary policy on the economy. To do this, they must convince investors to take them seriously, which means keeping deficits in check and finances stable, not jumping on the bandwagon of outlandish theories. Mr Erdogan’s experiment is best left in its trial phase. ■ Correction (July 9th 2023): An earlier version of this article misstated Ms Gopinath’s job title. Sorry. Read more from Free exchange, our column on economics:The working-from-home illusion fades (Jun 28th)Can the West build up its armed forces on the cheap? (Jun 22nd)Wage-price spirals are far scarier in theory than in practice (Jun 15th) Also: How the Free Exchange column got its name It is easy now to point to phenomena that were features of the zero-interest-rate age. Ape jpegs selling for millions of dollars; algorithms pricing and buying homes; 20-something tech workers making “day in the life” TikToks that consisted entirely of them making snacks. Record-breaking profits at investment banks appear to be another relic of the golden age. Workers hired to meet roaring demand have been left twiddling their thumbs. Now they are being shown the door.  Your browser does not support the <audio> element. Ahead of releasing their second-quarter earnings, institutions on Wall Street are trimming staff. Goldman Sachs culled 3,200 in the first quarter; on May 30th reports suggested the bank was letting go of another 250—this time mostly from among senior ranks. Morgan Stanley fired 3,000 or so in the second quarter. Bank of America has cut 4,000 and Citigroup 5,000. Lay-offs are also plaguing less glamorous bits of finance. Accenture and kpmg have both swung the axe.  This matters not only for the poor souls handed their belongings in a cardboard box, but for the city of New York. Just as tech lay-offs have hurt San Francisco, so finance lay-offs will hurt the Big Apple. According to Enrico Moretti, an economist at the University of California, Berkeley, each of the “knowledge jobs” that make cities like New York and San Francisco successful in turn supports another five service roles—some high-paying (like lawyers), others less so (like baristas). Even if there are not additional firings, Wall Street’s retrenchment will take a toll. According to New York’s state comptroller, the average bonus pool shrank by one-fifth in the last financial year, the biggest drop since the global financial crisis of 2007-09. Although banks did not balloon quite as much as tech firms during the covid-19 pandemic, when online activity surged and working patterns seemed ready to change for good, the axe is cutting almost as deep in places. Meta’s workforce nearly doubled in size between 2019 and 2022; the firm has since let go about half of new additions. Goldman’s workforce expanded by just over one-quarter between the end of 2019 and the end of 2022, from around 38,000 to just over 48,000. By laying off some 3,450 people the firm has unwound one-third of this increase.  Other banks have been a little slower to scale back. At Morgan Stanley, where employment also leapt by one-third over the same period, just one-eighth of the increase has been unwound. It is a similar story at Citigroup. There have yet to be major lay-offs at JPMorgan Chase, the king of Wall Street. Altogether, job losses might slow New York’s economy a tad—perhaps the market for TriBeCa lofts will cool—but they will hardly prove a fatal blow to a city of its size and vitality.  Yet perhaps there is further for the story to run. Tech-industry lay-offs got going in earnest in 2022, when almost 165,000 jobs were lost. They are now coming thick and fast. Since the start of the year, more than 210,000 jobs have been cut. History suggests that firing seasons build momentum. It took years for banks to downsize in the wake of the global financial crisis. Just as with the tech companies, lay-offs would need to be several times bigger to return financial firms to their pre-pandemic sizes. Although banks are trimming the fat, they do not yet look lean. ■ For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter. For as long as inflation has been high economists have fought about where it came from and what must be done to bring it down. Since central bankers have raised interest rates and headline inflation is falling, this debate may seem increasingly academic. In fact, it is increasingly important. Inflation is falling mostly because energy prices are down, a trend that will not last for ever. Underlying or “core” inflation is more stubborn (see chart 1). History suggests that even a small amount of sticky underlying inflation is hard to dislodge.  Your browser does not support the <audio> element. So the chiefs of the world’s most important central banks are now warning that their job is far from done. “Getting inflation back down to 2% has a long way to go,” said Jerome Powell, chairman of the Federal Reserve, on June 29th. “We cannot waver, and we cannot declare victory,” Christine Lagarde, president of the European Central Bank, told a meeting of policymakers in Portugal just two days earlier. Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, recently said that interest rates will probably stay higher than markets expect.  This means that there will be no let-up in the economists’ wars. The first front is partly ideological, and concerns who should shoulder the blame for rising prices. An unconventional but popular theory suggests greedy firms are at fault. This idea first emerged in America in mid-2021, when profit margins for non-financial companies were unusually strong and inflation was taking off. It is now gaining a second wind, propelled by the IMF, which recently found that rising profits “account for almost half the increase” in euro-zone inflation over the past two years. Ms Lagarde appears to be entertaining the thesis, too, telling the European Parliament that “certain sectors” had “taken advantage” of the economic turmoil, and that “it’s important that competition authorities could actually look at those behaviours.” Greedflation is a comforting idea for left-leaning types who feel that blame for inflation is too often pinned on workers. Yet it would be strange to think firms suddenly became greedier, making prices accelerate. Inflation is caused by demand exceeding supply—something that offers plentiful profit opportunities. The greedflation thesis thus “muddles inflation’s symptoms with its cause”, according to Neil Shearing of Capital Economics, a consultancy. Wages have tended to play catch-up with prices, not vice versa, because, as the IMF’s economists note, “wages are slower than prices to react to shocks”. That is a crucial lesson from today’s inflationary episode for those who always view economic stimulus as being pro-worker. The second front in the inflation wars concerns geography. America’s inflation was at first more home-grown than the euro zone’s. Uncle Sam spent 26% of GDP on fiscal stimulus during covid-19, compared with 8-15% in Europe’s big economies. And Europe faced a worse energy shock than America after Russia invaded Ukraine, both because of its dependence on Russian natural gas and the greater share of income that is spent on energy. A recent paper by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, chief economist at the IMF, and colleagues attributes just 6% of the euro zone’s underlying inflation surge to economic overheating, compared with 80% of America’s.  This implies that Europe can get away with looser policy. The 3% of GDP of extra fiscal stimulus the euro zone has recently unleashed by subsidising energy bills, the authors find, has not contributed to overheating, and by reducing measured energy prices may even have stopped an inflationary mindset from taking hold. (The authors caution that things might have been different had energy prices not fallen, reducing the subsidy.) Interest rates are lower in Europe, too. Financial markets expect them to peak at around 4% in the euro zone, compared with 5.5% in America.  Despite all this, inflation problems on each side of the Atlantic actually seem to be becoming more alike over time. In both places, inflation is increasingly driven by the price of local services, rather than food and energy (see chart 2). The pattern suggests that price rises in both places are being driven by strong domestic spending. Calculated on a comparable basis, core inflation is higher in the euro zone. So is wage growth. According to trackers produced by Goldman Sachs, a bank, wages are growing at an annualised pace of 4-4.5% in America, and nearly 5.5% in the euro area. Hence the importance of a final front: the labour market. Even if profit margins fall, central banks cannot hit their 2% inflation targets on a sustained basis without the demand for and supply of workers coming into better balance. Last year economists debated whether in America this required a higher unemployment rate. Chris Waller of the Fed said no: it was plausible job vacancies, which had been unusually high, could fall instead. Olivier Blanchard, Alex Domash and Lawrence Summers were more pessimistic. In past economic cycles, they pointed out, vacancies fell only as unemployment rose. Since then Mr Waller’s vision has in part materialised. Vacancies have fallen enough that, according to Goldman, the rebalancing of the labour market is three-quarters complete. Unemployment remains remarkably low, at 3.7%. Yet the process seems to have stalled of late (fresh data were due to be released as we published this article). Mr Blanchard and Ben Bernanke, a former Fed chairman, recently estimated that, given the most recent relationship between vacancies and joblessness, getting inflation to the Fed’s target would require the unemployment rate to exceed 4.3% for “a period of time”. Luca Gagliardone and Mark Gertler, two economists, reckon that unemployment might rise to 5.5% in 2024, resulting in inflation dropping to 3% in a year and then falling towards 2% “at a very slow pace”.  Rises in unemployment of such a size are not enormous, but in the past have typically been associated with recessions. Meanwhile, in the euro zone, vacancies have not been particularly elevated relative to unemployment, making the route to a painless disinflation even more difficult to foresee. It is this front of the inflation wars which is most finely poised—and where the stakes are highest. ■ For more expert analysis of the biggest stories in economics, finance and markets, sign up to Money Talks, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter.  The Prime Minister of the Cook Islands, Mark Brown, has announced that the country plans to begin deep-sea mining despite the practice’s potential environmental impact.   The mining of polymetallic nodules from the sea floor is the topic of intense debate. Metals found in the nodules, including copper, manganese, nickel sulphate and cobalt sulphate, are in high demand due to their use in transition technologies including electric vehicles.  Brown said that the controversial practice is “the right thing to do for our country”, but that they will “proceed with caution”, in an interview with the Guardian.  The announcement comes ahead of the 9 July deadline by which point the UN-affiliated International Seabed Authority (ISA) must outline regulations governing mining of the seabed. The regulations are unlikely to be ready by next week amid ongoing debate, but a number of companies and governments are expected to apply for permits.   Numerous countries have called for a “precautionary pause” or moratorium on the practice until more in-depth research has been completed. These include Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, France, Germany, New Zealand, Palau, Panama, Samoa and Spain. France has also issued an outright ban on the practice.  “We are the ones in charge of our destiny, and it is Cook Islanders that will continue to make decisions about how our Cook Islands resources are developed,” Brown said.  Last month Norway announced plans to begin deep-sea mining in its national waters, despite criticism from its own environmental agency.  Environmentalists and marine experts have warned that mining at such extreme depths could have serious and lasting impacts on marine wildlife and ecosystems. Swathes of the deep ocean still remain poorly researched, with biologists predicting that thousands of species living there are yet to be named.  Deep-sea mining supporters claim that it is possible to remove polymetallic nodules in a responsible manner and that the green transition will not be possible without access to these minerals.   Along with Nauru, Tonga and Kiribati, the Cook Islands is a state sponsor of international companies preparing to apply for a permit to mine the ocean floor in sovereign and international Pacific waters.  The Clarion-Clipperton Zone in the Pacific Ocean is predicted to be rich in mineral deposits and is the primary site of interest for a number of miners.  In 2021, the Pacific state of Nauru activated an obscure sub-clause in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which gave the ISA a two-year deadline to finalise regulations.  Ivanhoe Electric has formally created a joint venture (JV) with Saudi miner Ma’aden to explore gold, copper, silver and electric metals in the country. The new JV is named Ma’aden Ivanhoe Electric Exploration and Development. In addition, Ma’aden has closed the purchase of a 9.9% stake in Ivanhoe Electric for $127.1m. The transaction involved the issuance of nearly 10.2 million Ivanhoe Electric shares, at $12.38 apiece. Ma’aden agreed to a five-year standstill to limit its stake to a maximum of 19.9%, which is subject to some exceptions. The company has Sofia Bianchi as its nominee to Ivanhoe Electric’s board, expanding the board membership count to nine. Ivanhoe plans to invest $66m of Ma’aden’s proceeds into the new company. Ivanhoe will also use the remaining $61.1m to advance its mineral projects in the US and for general and corporate purposes and working capital needs. The new JV will finance exploration activities and buy three Typhoon machines from Ivanhoe Electric. These machines will be used for exploring nearly 48,500km² of unexplored lands in Arabian Shield that the Saudi company has exclusively made available to the JV. Ivanhoe Electric executive chairman Robert Friedland said: “Through the formation of this important joint venture with our partner, Ma’aden, we will begin the most extensive exploration program for metals ever conducted in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. “The Arabian Shield is an area rich in mineral potential, but considerably underexplored for metals. With our proprietary and powerful Typhoon geophysical survey technology and the data analysis provided by our 94%-owned subsidiary, Computational Geosciences, we aim to uncover new discoveries of critical metals in Saudi Arabia.” Ivanhoe Electric’s Typhoon works with an electrical output of up to 200 amps and 10,000V. A transmitter generates a signal with a high signal-to-noise ratio. Typhoons can transmit both induced polarisation and electromagnetic signals, which can be used for searching a variety of mineral deposit types. The Typhoon machines are expected to arrive in the country next month and surveying programmes could begin in September. The machines will be used for surveying geophysical anomalies, which could be indicative of sulfide mineral deposits such as copper, nickel, gold and silver. A technical committee with members from the two companies is working to prioritise targets for the surveys. Canadian mining company Hudbay Minerals and Marubeni have signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) for a multi-year exploration partnership pertaining to the former’s existing processing facilities in Flin Flon, Manitoba, Canada. The companies have agreed to negotiate the definitive agreement terms to govern the Flin Flon properties and the relationship between the parties. The MoU contemplates Marubeni funding approximately $10m–$15m in exploration expenditures on the project properties while Hudbay will serve as operator and undertake exploration activities. Hudbay president and CEO Peter Kukielski said: “This exploration partnership would allow us to couple our operational and exploration expertise with Marubeni’s balance sheet strength to test our large Flin Flon land package and potentially revive our dormant Flin Flon processing facilities.” Furthermore, the MoU envisages a future joint venture between Marubeni and Hudbay if the exploration work results in new deposit discoveries in the Flin Flon region. Upon satisfaction of certain earn-in obligations, Marubeni is expected to have the option to acquire a minority stake in the projects. This would allow the parties to jointly pursue the projects’ development. Marubeni copper mining department general manager Masafumi Ichigetsu said: “This exploration partnership would give us access to the Flin Flon Greenstone Belt, one of the most prospective base metal VMS [volcanogenic massive sulphide] camps in the world. “We see tremendous opportunity in this camp where we have the ability to partner with Hudbay and benefit from their technical expertise and proven track record of successful discovery, development and operation of many mines in the region.” Texaco Lubricants has been active in the mining industry for over 75 years. Mining is a truly global industry, and one in which Texaco has strong relationships and long-term agreements with large mining companies across the US and Asia-Pacific, as well as in Europe, central Asia and Africa. Our comprehensive research and development, as well as our proprietary base oil and additive divisions, allow us to create products specifically for the sector and its unique challenges. For example, Texaco Delo 600 ADF engine oil provides effective deposit control, helps maintain long drain performance and contributes to diesel particulate filters (DPF) protection. Other bespoke products include Delo TorqForce Syn SAE 5W-20 transmission and hydraulic system lubricant, and Delo Syn ATF 668. All our products are specially formulated to help protect valuable equipment and help reduce operating costs. Across the globe, we work with almost every kind of mining operation. In Europe, our customers are largely focused on gold, zinc and copper, while in Africa, we also support customers in the extraction of bauxite and iron ore. One of the main advantages is the premium quality of our products. Operational efficiency and reliability are key in this sector, so our customers know when they select our premium products that they can help them achieve that. In addition, we have a wide range of options, from engine and hydraulic oils through to greases and coolants. We do our best to cover all equipment demands, no matter what the business requires. Initial product selection is incredibly important for mining operations. You’ve got to ensure you get the right products for each individual application or you may face issues down the line with maintenance and efficiency. Our salespeople are highly trained technical experts, so they can give sound advice, based on a deep understanding of our products and the current industry technology. Another key area that deserves to be highlighted, particularly given the supply challenges over the last couple of years, is the commitment and adaptability of our supply chain and logistics teams. Given the location of some of the facilities we work with, our logistics providers are able to work around some very complex issues, including areas of political unrest, border restraints, geographical features and extreme weather challenges. Our benefits aren’t just contained within our premium products. Working with Texaco means you will receive a holistic and flexible approach. This includes after-sales and technical support, supply chain and logistical assistance, as well as ongoing customer support post-delivery. Hammer Metals has agreed to acquire an 80% interest in the Mount Dorothy and Cobalt Ridge Projects in North West Queensland, Australia, from Element Minerals Australia (Element), a subsidiary of Global Energy Metals Corporation (GEMC). Located in the Mount Isa inlier region of North West Queensland, the two copper and critical elements projects, jointly known as Mount Isa projects, were initially sold by Hammer Metals to GEMC in 2019 as part of its Millenium cobalt project divestment. The Mount Dorothy Project is located approximately 10km south-west of Hammer’s copper-rare earths discovery at Hardway prospect. In a press statement, Hammer said: “In the light of Hammer’s recent exploration success in making a significant copper-rare earth discovery at the nearby Hardway prospect, and the exploration results from Mount Dorothy by China Yunnan Copper Australia in 2011 that suggest similarities in the mineralogy of the Hardway and Mount Dorothy mineral systems, the company is pleased to have re-acquired the prospects.” Under the deal, Hammer will acquire 80% of the exploration tenure holding the Mount Dorothy and Cobalt Ridge prospects in exchange for a 1% net smelter royalty on each of the properties. Hammer will also incur all exploration and holding costs for the two projects until the pre-feasibility study is completed. Upon completion of the study, Element will have the option to either fund its pro-rata annual expenditure or be diluted, based on the dilution formula of a standard joint venture. Hammer managing director Daniel Thomas said: “We believe the prospects deserve further exploration and will complement Hammer’s already impressive project inventory in the world-class Mt Isa district. “We are confident in the opportunity that the Mount Isa region presents for minerals that are critical for Australia’s future and we are determined that Hammer will play a leading role in this region in helping to secure the raw materials needed for batteries and new energy technologies through projects like Mt Dorothy and Cobalt Ridge.” Global Energy Metals president and CEO Mitchell Smith said the partial sale of the Mount Isa Projects is consistent with its strategy of actively managing and streamlining its property portfolio through a partnership model. It was said to be ’low-hanging fruit’; nevertheless, bringing battery energy storage systems (BESS) to Western Australia’s vast mining projects has required huge innovations and billions of dollars in capital investments. Yet there remains considerable interest in BESS across the energy industries, and the state’s mines are proving to be the perfect testing ground for renewable power generation projects, thanks to its environmental and climatic characteristics.  The vastness of the state, and by its nature the remoteness of its mining communities, has meant that, for almost as long as Western Australians have mined, they have needed to supply sites with the resources to produce power. All too often, though, they have been carbon-producing fossil fuels, delivered by carbon-intensive heavy machinery across thousands of miles.   Some of the state’s biggest miners are taking advantage of this opportunity. Rio Tinto has invested $2bn into its iron ore operations in Western Australia, as it looks to halve its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 through renewable assets and better energy infrastructure.  Rio Tinto is not alone in trying to clean the carbon from mining. If current efforts in Western Australia to do so didn’t prove enough of a signal of the country’s intent to try to be a world leader, the Electric Mine Consortium must surely serve to help position it there. Operating out of Australia, but very much harbouring global ambitions, it’s on a mission to cut the 7% of total greenhouse gas emissions for which the sector is responsible.   Graeme Stanway, a co-founder of the consortium, believes that as the way we generate and store power drastically changes, the mining community is eager for greater resources to play its part. “Like the electric vehicle industry, electric mines are the future,” he says. “Not only can they be safer through the eradication of diesel particulates, pollution, noise and vibrations, they can also be more targeted, precise and effective when it comes to mining, and yield stronger results than traditional mines with minimal ground disturbance.”  Across an integrated network of 17 mines and four independent port terminals, all linked via a 2,000km rail network, Rio Tinto hopes to deploy a huge 1GW of renewable power to its vast Pilbara operations. It wants to harness the power of the sun via solar photovoltaic (PV), making the most of the fact that the state is one of the sunniest places in the world, year-round.  As 2022 drew to a close, Rio Tinto announced it was investing a shade over $400m in large-scale solar PV and BESS technology for the region, as part of its $2bn project. The package includes the construction of two 100MW solar PV plants, supported by 200MW of BESS.   The miner hopes to commission the facilities by 2026, adding to other work currently underway to increase the supply and storage of renewable energy in the region, and a new 34MW solar facility at the Gudai-Darri iron ore mine. that the company hopes that the latter facility alone will help Rio Tinto cut as much as 90,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions annually, the equivalent carbon footprint of 6,000 typical Australian homes.  Announcing it had secured a multi-million dollar contract to build the 34MW solar farm and BESS facility in July 2021, NRW Holdings said the contract included the design, procurement, construction, testing and commissioning of all equipment – including a 33kV substation – recognising the company’s experience of delivering projects for Rio Tinto in the region. “Mining companies have a great opportunity ahead to take advantage of new technologies and techniques that can help them achieve their sustainability goals,” said Hitachi Energy’s head of business development and technology Juergen Zimmermann. His comments came by way of an internal interview shared on the company’s website in September 2022, during which he spoke of the DeGrussa copper-gold mine in Perth.  Opened in 2016, the facility is home to a multi-million dollar solar project which Sandfire says is the largest integrated off-grid solar and battery storage facility in the world Comprising more than 34,000 solar PV panels, with a single-axis tracking system mounted on 4,700 steel posts across 20 hectares, the site delivers almost 20% of the annual power requirements of the mine.   The company said that the project has been incorporated with the mine’s diesel-fired power station and base-load power, with sufficient minimum load to ensure it can meet the power needs of the process plant and underground mine. Each of the thousands of panels is connected via what Sandfire calls: “an extensive network of low-voltage, high-voltage and communication cables to a 6MW lithium-ion battery storage facility and the existing 19MW diesel-fired power station at DeGrussa.”   Zimmermann said the hybrid solar, diesel and energy storage system has helped offset 11 million litres of diesel. “In addition to the environmental benefits, the project has provided a blueprint for the adoption of renewable energy at mine sites and remote communities around the world and has been widely showcased as a success story on how to integrate renewables at mines,” he added.  Back in 2020, when the world was gripped by a pandemic, Gold Fields’ Agnew gold mine took delivery of a lithium-ion BESS that enabled it to meet more than 50% of its energy demand with renewable energy. France-based manufacturer and system integrator specialist Saft supplied the BESS, installed by power solutions provider EDL.  Today, EDL owns and operates the hybrid renewable power microgrid which generates 18MW of wind and 4MW of solar power, a 21MW off-grid gas and diesel engine power plant and the 13MW BESS. The network comprises five wind turbines and 10,710 solar panels, and boasts one of the most impressive ranges of renewable power generation in the state.   Speaking in 2020, at the news that EDL and Gold Fields were joint winners at the Australian Engineering Excellence Awards, EDL’s CEO James Harman said: “The microgrid has surpassed our expectations for high renewable energy penetration with 99.99% reliability. We also congratulate our customer and award co-winner Gold Fields. [Its] clean energy vision inspired our work with our capable suppliers to push the boundaries of existing technologies to develop this ground-breaking hybrid renewable energy system.”  “It is an outstanding example of the capacity of the hybrid renewable energy model to meet the dynamic power requirements of remote mining operations,” added Gold Fields executive vice president for Australasia Stuart Mathews. “This is a very clear demonstration of our commitment to reducing our carbon footprint, whilst strengthening our security of supply, and paves the way for the industry as a whole to implement renewable solutions.”  In mid-February this year, Pacific Energy’s subsidy, Hybrid Systems Australia, announced it had supplied Fortescue Metals Group’s $700m Pilbara Energy Connect (PEC) project with what it called WA’s largest network-integrated BESS. A spokesperson from Hybrid Systems said: “The battery systems use industry-leading grid stabilising control systems, including millisecond-response capabilities and Kokam battery technology, to provide greater protection against load spikes and dips and ensure overall network stability.”  The 42MW BESS, which included collaboration with Hitachi Energy and is now operational, will stockpile renewable energy from a 150MW solar farm. Dino Otranto, chief operating officer of iron ore at Fortescue, said the PEC will support the company’s: “world-leading decarbonisation agenda, allowing the incorporation of additional large scale renewable energy into our network in the future.” A year earlier, Fortescue announced a 5.4GW solar PV, wind and BESS project for the region, building up a strong commitment to renewables in the region over time. It filed a proposal with Western Australia’s Environmental Protection Authority for the multi-billion dollar Uaroo Renewable Energy Hub, comprising a 3.33GW solar farm, a 2GW wind farm and a 9.1GWh capacity BESS, all situated across a 10,000 hectare site. Australian miner Firetail Resources (FTL) has signed a binding term sheet to purchase up to 80% stake in the Peruvian copper projects of compatriot mining company Valor Resources. Under the agreement, FTL will acquire up to 80% of Valor subsidiary Kiwanda, which owns the mining concessions for the Picha and Charaque copper projects. Picha is a copper-silver exploration project, located in the Moquegua and Puno Departments of southern Peru. The project has 27 mining concessions that cover an area of 200km². It is prospective for multiple styles of copper mineralisation.   Charaque is located 30km north-east of the Picha project and has eight claims covering an area around 60km². The area around the project is an active exploration area with mining companies such as Barrick, Teck Resources and Fresnillo owning lands. As a deal consideration, FTL has to pay A$200,000 in cash within five days of executing the agreement. The amount will be refundable if it cannot complete its obligations. Once the obligations are complete, it will pay another A$550,000 in cash. Subject to approval of shareholders, the firm will issue 15 million shares at A$0.10 apiece, to acquire an initial 60% interest in Kiwanda. This will be followed by another 20 million performance rights convertible into Firetail shares, for acquiring an additional 20% stake in Kiwanda. As part of the deal, Valor executive chairman George Bauk will gain a seat on FTL’s board as a non-executive director. FTL executive chairman Brett Grosvenor said: “This acquisition has strategic importance to Firetail as it complements our existing assets and provides near-term exposure to the copper market with drilling commencing in the short term with an experienced ‘ready to go’ team in Peru. “The Picha Project is drill ready following a significant exploration programme undertaken over the past 18 months, which has identified large numbers of significant targets through surface work coupled with IP/Resistivity surveys. “The structure of the deal is complementary to all parties involved and ensures that development of the assets is aligned with the vendor and company strategic directions whilst providing a cash-neutral purchase position to FTL shareholders as we receive a portion of the Charaque farm-in payments over the next four years.” Metso has received a contract from Canadian company First Quantum Minerals (FQM) for the delivery of minerals processing equipment to the Kansanshi copper mine S3 expansion in Zambia. Under the contract, which is valued at more than €20m ($21.78m), Metso will supply equipment such as apron feeders, mechanical flotation cells, high-intensity Concorde Cell units, HRT thickeners and a clarifyer. Metso said that most of the separation equipment is part of its Planet Positive offering. Metso flotation vice-president Antti Rinne said: “Kansanshi’s flotation flowsheet combines the well-proven, energy-efficient TankCell flotation cells with the new Concorde Cell, unlocking the potential for further improved flotation performance. “Concorde Cell high-intensity, forced-air pneumatic flotation cells allow operations to enhance fine and ultrafine particle selectivity.” Located near Solwezi in Zambia’s North-Western Province, Kansanshi is reputed to be one of the world’s largest copper mines. FQM is working on an expansion that includes a stand-alone processing plant to increase copper production at the mine. In May 2023, First Quantum Minerals’ board of directors sanctioned the $1.25bn S3 expansion at the Kansanshi copper-gold mine and the $100m Enterprise nickel project, both located in Zambia. Upon completion of the expansion, First Quantum Minerals expects the copper production from the Kansanshi mine to be nearly 250,000 tonnes per annum on average for the remaining operational life of the mine to 2044. Mining giant Glencore has submitted a non-binding offer to PolyMet Mining to purchase the outstanding common shares it does not already own in the latter for $2.11 per share. The bid price is at par with PolyMet’s rights offering in April 2023. It marks a nearly 167% premium over the company’s stock close on 30 June 2023. The offer is subject to the execution of a definitive deal, along with clearance from PolyMet’s shareholders. Glencore currently owns 159 million shares in PolyMet, representing a stake of nearly 82.19%. Glencore also holds a purchase warrant, according to which it is entitled to acquire 811,190 shares at $5.87 apiece. If the company exercises this warrant, it will own more than 160 million common shares, increasing its stake to 82.26%. Currently, PolyMet’s independent Special Committee is reviewing Glencore’s proposal. In a statement, it said: “PolyMet cautions its shareholders and others considering trading in its securities that no decisions have been made with respect to PolyMet’s response to the proposal.  “There can be no assurance that any definitive offer will be made, that any definitive agreement will be executed or that this or any other transaction will be approved or consummated.” Earlier this year, PolyMet completed the formation of the previously announced NewRange Copper Nickel joint venture (JV) with Teck Resources. PolyMet and Teck each hold a 50% stake in the JV. According to NewRange Copper Nickel, the NorthMet and Mesaba deposits containing high-demand copper, nickel, cobalt and platinum group metals now come under the management of the JV. The two mines are said to contain nearly 702 million tonnes and 2,207 million tonnes for NorthMet and Mesaba, respectively. Volkswagen and Stellantis have each invested US $100m in mining company ACG’s efforts to acquire two mines in Brazil from private equity group Appian Capital. According to the Financial Times, the deal “highlights how car groups are making direct mining investments”. The Santa Rita mine produces nickel sulphide, while the Serrote mine produces copper and gold.  ACG’s US $1.1bn transaction is also being supported by Swiss miner Glencore and investment fund La Mancha. Through its subsidiary PowerCo, Volkswagen is investing $100m in the deal “as a prepayment for future nickel supplied by the mines”, the Financial Times said. Stellantis has invested $100m directly into ACG. With China’s dominance of the critical minerals used for EV battery production increasingly generating concern amongst western governments, automakers are beginning to place greater emphasis in sourcing battery metals. “The global supply chain is breaking up and segregating into the eastern supply chain and the western supply chain,” ACG chief executive Artem Volynets was quoted as saying. “And we are very much on the forefront of that, supplying into the western supply chain.”  